# What is a Bat Mitzvah?

> Here is some information on what to expect at Pauline's Bat Mitzvah service. 

### What is a Bat Mitzvah?
When a boy reaches age 13 or a girl reaches age 12, he or she becomes *Bar/Bat Mitzvah*, that is a full fledged member of the Jewish community and can fully participate in religious ceremonies. It is customary to celebrate this coming of age by being "called to the Torah" and chant a particular portion of the Torah in front of the community of congregants, friends and family. Being written in Hebrew, reading the Torah takes many years of study and is part of religious education. Pauline has been learning since first grade. The reading will occur during the Shabbat (Sabbath) morning service that she will also help lead. You are invited to attend this service to support Pauline as she reaches this important milestone. Pauline will also give a D'var Torah, a speech with her interpretation of the Torah portion. See [here](https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/bar-and-bat-mitzvah-101/) for more information. Her Torah portion (determined by the date of the service) is [Shoftim](https://www.myjewishlearning.com/torah-portions/parashat-shoftim/). 
   - Note that information in the web links above state that guests and congregants often arrive late to services. Every synagogue is different - at Oak Park Temple the custom is to arrive on time (services start at 10am) and to not be late. 

### I'm not Jewish, do I need to come to the Saturday morning service at Oak Park Temple?
Yes, we very much hope that you will come to the service. The service is where Pauline performs with the support of her family and friends. It is important that you be there with her to celebrate this milestone that she has worked so hard to achieve. See [here](https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/what-a-barbat-mitzvah-guest-needs-to-know/) for some good information on what you as a guest can expect (please come on time to the service - see note above). 

### Will I feel welcome at Oak Park Temple?
Yes! We belong to this temple because the clergy and congregation are very warm and welcoming to **everyone**. Oak Park Temple is part of the Reform Movement, which is on the liberal end of the spectrum and is egalitarian. The rabbi and congregation have strong ties to congregations from many churches and mosques in the Chicago area. See [here](http://abc7chicago.com/religion/building-bridges-between-muslim-jewish-communities-in-oak-park/1670287/) and [here](http://www.oakpark.com/Community/Blogs/11-14-2017/Out-of-many-faiths,-one-service/) for examples. Do not hesitate to contact us with any questions. We can also put you in touch with Rabbi Weiss who will be more than happy to talk to you about any concerns.

### What is the decorum for the service?
Cell phones must be silenced or turned off. Photographs and taking videos are not permitted (you'll notice that our photographer will be relegated to a loft some distance away). If you need to chat with someone louder than a whisper, then you should step out into the lobby (see below). 

### Everyone keeps standing up and sitting down - do I have to as well?
You should if you are able. The congregation will be asked to stand at certain times during the service. This is out of respect and does not constitute any affirmation of religious belief (see [here](https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/what-a-barbat-mitzvah-guest-needs-to-know/)). For example, we stand for the Mourners Kaddish to show support and respect to those who are in mourning. We stand when the ark is opened and closed to show respect for its importance. Every so often, you may see people bow slightly ... you don't need to follow that custom. Interestingly, one of the most important parts of the liturgy, the Shema, is said sitting. 

### I don't know Hebrew
The majority of the congregation doesn't understand Hebrew either. Many of us can pronounce the Hebrew and have a general understanding of the meaning, but certainly not word-for-word. Almost all of the prayers are written in English too and page numbers will be announced so you can follow along. If you feeling like joining in, it's perfectly fine to read the English to yourself or substitute your own thoughts. The Hebrew is also often transliterated (written phonetically in English) if you do want to try to follow. There are times where we do responsive reading in English. It's fun to listen to how unsynchronized the responses will be. Doing your own thing (to yourself) is a part of the tradition. The prayer books we use (called Siddurs) are a new more modern edition and have extra text on the pages with alternate readings and explanations. Feel free to read what you find interesting. You don't need to keep up. 

### If I stand up at a particular time, follow along to a certain prayer or song, or wear a kippah, am I at risk of changing my religion?
If this is a real concern, rest assured that the answer is no. Converting to Judaism involves a long process of study and many meetings with a rabbi. Except for being born into a Jewish family, it is not possible to become jewish inadvertently or instantly. There will be times in the service (see above) when everyone will stand; this is out of respect and does not constitute any affirmation of religious belief. We hope you will feel comfortable standing with us. Similarly, wearing a kippah is also done out of respect. 

### I may need to step out of the sanctuary. How can I do that?
If you need to step out into the lobby, please do so quietly and come back in when you are able. You should try not to step out if the congregation is standing. The time of least disruption is when the congregation has been standing and transitions to sitting - simply step out then. If you can't wait for an opportune time, then just don't worry about it and go into the lobby quietly. There's a bathroom in the lobby as well as more bathrooms at the top and bottom of the stairs that are by the main entrance. If you are in need of assistance, there will be someone in the temple office who can help you. 

### I can't make the service, can I still come to the party?
As mentioned above, we very much hope that you will join us to support Pauline and see her reach the milestone that she has worked so hard to achieve. But if missing the service is unavoidable, then we would be very happy for you to join the celebration at the party in Countryside. 
